Propose abstract passable data model (#125)
ocapn/ocapn: draft-specifications/Model.md

> to round-trip all numbers except NaNs, infinities, and negative zero, but all
> other numbers expressible with an IEEE 754 double-precision float to survive a
> round trip without loss of precision.
> We also do not expect integers expressed with higher precision in JSON to
> survive a round-trip through an OCapN-compatible JSON codec.
>
> Consensus on preserving -0:
> - As of May 16, @erights insisted that -0 round trip to 0 https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1550020450
> - On May 23, @zenhack proposed preserving -0 https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1560116857
> - We converged out of band and Agoric has committed to preserving -0 https://github.com/endojs/endo/issues/1602

## String (JSON\*)

A string of Unicode code points but no lone/unpaired surrogates.

> - **Guile**: `""`
> - **JavaScript**: `''`
> - **Python**: `''`
>
> \*Strings participate in the JSON subset of OCapN except any strings that
> contain unpaired/lone surrogates.
>
> OCapN cannot send or receive strings that come from a UTF-16 language
> representation (such as a JavaScript string) that contains lone/unpaired
> surrogates.
> Notes: [Jan 2024 meeting

> > notes](https://cryptpad.fr/code/#/2/code/edit/Ng7kXl9rCF5qnTQX60UCpDHE/)

Reviewer: fwiw, that link now says "This document was deleted because of inactivity"

> > notes](https://cryptpad.fr/code/#/2/code/edit/Ng7kXl9rCF5qnTQX60UCpDHE/)

Author: The cryptpad links have been replaced with github permalinks.

> notes](https://cryptpad.fr/code/#/2/code/edit/Ng7kXl9rCF5qnTQX60UCpDHE/)
> record that we agreed on ByteArray because it was the winner of the poll, and
> we had already agreed to resolve this specific issue by poll among these
> three choices.

## Selector

A string of Unicode code points, differentiated from a proper string by its
type.
Selectors cannot contain lone/unpaired surrogates.

> - **Guile**: symbols `'name`
> - **JavaScript**:
>   ```js
>   {
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle'): 'selector',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: 'name',
>   }
>   ```
> - **Python**: `Selector('name')` where `Selector` is imported from `ocapn`.
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/46
>
> OCapN uses the name selector to avoid the implication that they will
> correspond to a language's symbol type in all languages that have a symbol
> type.
> Selectors may correspond to symbols in languages where a symbol is eligible
> for garbage collection when there are no extant references.
> At this time, JavaScript cannot safely use registered symbols like
> `Symbol.for('name')` for OCapN selectors, because registered symbols are
> interned without possibility of eventual garbage collection.
>

> > OCapN supports one operator for delivering both function application and

Author: Extending the non-normative note in case the implication gets lost in the above about method invocation.

> method invocation.
> By convention, method invocation is equivalent to function application, where
> the first argument is a selector followed by the remaining arguments.

# Container

## List (JSON)

A list of any quantity of values.

> - **Guile**: `'()`
> - **JavaScript** and **JSON**: `[]`
> - **Python**: `()` (We have not discussed whether to use tuple or list. Tuple
>   is less mutable, though enforcing immutability in Python is not likely to be
>   a goal the way it is in hardened JavaScript.)
>
> Lists participate in the JSON subset of OCapN.
>
> We achieved consensus to name the type "List" at the [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94) meeting.

> ## Struct (JSON)

Author: The important point is that the keys must be strings, and “dictionary” does capture that distinction in juxtaposition with “map”. Agoric uses the term “record”, but I believe that was disqualified on the grounds that it is too close to a term present in the Syrup concrete model (but absent in the data model!). I am sure Agoric (@erights) would welcome the term “record” if we can move the Syrup word out of the way (say “tuple”).

> ## Struct (JSON)

Author: If you ask a C person, they will tell you that a struct is an association between a name (constrained to valid C identifiers) and a value (at an offset in a compact memory representation implied by their order of appearance and padding necessary to satisfy the underlying architecture). Our interpretation is consistent with the germane portion of that.

If you ask a C++ person, a struct is simply a class where all of the fields and methods are implicitly public. As in most cases, the C++ person is wrong.

A Protobuf person will tell you they prefer the term “message”. Messages can contain messages, and in fact, you can’t express the difference between presence of a zero value and absence of a field without a so-called “message”. Their opinion can be dismissed because they had an opportunity to pick one of “protocol” or “interface”, and instead did both (Protobuf IDL) and added  “service”, to refer to essentially the same thing. Protobuf people have strange preferences.

If we choose to reöpen this aging wound, I dislike but am open to “dictionary”. I like “record”. I think “struct” is fine.

> ## Struct (JSON)

Author: Having discussed this here and with @erights out-of-band, I am continuing this PR with “struct” since we have tentative consensus on this and not the alternatives. Mark and I object to “dictionary” since our model for dictionaries in JavaScript/TypeScript is that a dictionary is a specialization on maps, where the keys are specifically strings, and values are a homogeneous type, whereas structs are modeled as objects with known and heterogeneous (KeyT to ValueT) pairs.

```ts
type Dict<T> = Map<string, T>
```

Mark and I would not object to “record” but expect Spritely would on grounds that the term is reserved for a different concept in the concrete Syrup protocol.

> ## Struct (JSON)

Author: At the December 10 meeting, we decided to proceed with verbiage that the name “struct” is tentative. https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/144

> list, sorted list, or a set of unique values.
>
> - **Guile**: currently a Guile record labeled `'(syrec ...)` (**imported**)
> - **JavaScript**: an object with the key `Symbol.for('passStyle')` and value
>   `tagged`, with a string tagName and a single `"payload"` field carrying the tagged value.
>   ```js
>   {
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle')]: 'tagged',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: tagName,
>     payload
>   }
>   ```
> - **Python**: `Tagged(tag, value)` where `tag` is a `string` and `Tagged` is
>   imported from `ocapn`.
>
> OCapN tagged data have a single value (are not variadic) [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94)
>
> What are tagged values for? https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/52

## Remotable

A value that can receive messages.

A remotable value is either locally implemented or forwards messages to the peer
where such a local implementation exists for delivery to it.
The latter is referred to as a presence.

Comparing the identities of remotable values is pass-invariant, meaning that
comparing the identities of any pair of remotable values will produce the same
result on one peer if passed over OCapN to another peer and compared there,

> regardless of whether either value is a presence on either peer.

Reviewer 2: As I'm reviewing this now, I have trouble wrapping my head around this sentence but that could just be the different terminology (compared to Goblins) and how these are implemented in JS. Not sure this is useful feedback but I thought I'd flag it anyway.

Author: I’ve rewritten this section. Please let me know if it continue to be opaque.

This document captures a summary of consensus and remaining contention for the
OCapN data model and abstract syntax, excluding the concern of concrete
representation of these on the wire, but including non-normative
representations in a selection of implementation languages.

Commentary in block quotes is not normative.

> Non-normative commentary.

# Atom

## Undefined

A value representing the absence of a value.

> - **Guile**: `*unspecified*`
> - **JavaScript**: `undefined`
> - **Python**: `None`

## Null (JSON)

A value representing `null` as distinct from `undefined` in JSON.

> In order for the JSON subset of JavaScript to be passable, Undefined must be

> > distinguishable from Null.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, this reads strangely. Isn't JSON inherently passable?

Author: There are caveats.

- JSON documents that contain any string that includes a Unicode surrogate is not passable.
- JSON documents with numbers that exceed the precision available to an IEEE 64 bit floating point number are not passable.

The second caveat isn’t really a caveat for the ECMA 404 version of JSON but the Unicode limitation does not admit all JSON expressible in JavaScript.

This comment speaks more to the point that if OCapN didn’t have separate Null and Undefined, JSON documents that had an explicit `null` in them would not have pass-invariant structural equivalence (be “passable”). Null and undefined would have to be collapsed into a single type, such that either struct fields with null values were omitted when they returned, or struct fields will undefined values would return as null.

Author: I’ve posted a commit that avoids the jargon “passable” and makes painfully clear the scenario that OCapN holds invariant by distinguishing Null from Undefined.

Reviewer 3: > * JSON documents that contain any string that includes a Unicode surrogate is not passable.
> * JSON documents with numbers that exceed the precision available to an IEEE 64 bit floating point number are not passable.

Annals of "everything is exactly the same": [RFC 7493 I-JSON](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7493)
> Object member names, and string values in arrays and object members, MUST NOT include code points that identify Surrogates or Noncharacters as defined by [<a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7493#ref-UNICODE" title="&quot;The Unicode Standard&quot;">UNICODE</a>].
> …
> I-JSON messages SHOULD NOT include numbers that express greater magnitude or precision than an IEEE 754 double precision number provides, for example, 1E400 or 3.141592653589793238462643383279.
> …
> An I-JSON sender cannot expect a receiver to treat an integer whose absolute value is greater than 9007199254740991 (i.e., that is outside the range [-(2\*\*53)+1, (2\*\*53)-1]) as an exact value.
> …
> Objects in I-JSON messages MUST NOT have members with duplicate names.

> representation (such as a JavaScript string) that contains lone/unpaired
> surrogates.
> Notes: [Jan 2024 meeting
> notes](https://cryptpad.fr/code/#/2/code/edit/Ng7kXl9rCF5qnTQX60UCpDHE/)
> record that we agreed that strings can only be well-formed Unicode, i.e.,
> cannot contain unpaired surrogates.
> For JavaScript, if a string does not pass [the `isWellFormed`
> predicate](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-is-usv-string), then it is not a
> Passable string.
>
> Agoric has agreed to tentatively omit lone surrogates, pending vetting of the
> performance of the implementation in their CapTP.
> https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/47
>
> Agoric previously held the position that all valid strings that JavaScript
> can parse with `JSON.parse` should round-trip.
> https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1550370096,
> https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1550481111
>
> Spritely has consistently preferred a representation that can be captured
> with UTF-8, which cannot transit lone/unpaired surrogates.
> (October 10, 2023)

## ByteArray

An array of bytes.

> - **Guile**: `#vu8()`
> - **JavaScript**: `new ArrayBuffer()`

> > - **Python**: `b''`

Reviewer 4: The Guile and Python examples show literals but the JS one is a mutable thing. In Guile, the equivalent to `new ArrayBuffer()` to make a mutable bytevector would be `(make-bytevector len)`.

Author: @erights is proposing immutable ArrayBuffers this very week, so I anticipate updating this, but this is close enough for now.

>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/48
>
> At the [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94) meeting,
> we agreed to settle on the prefix "byte" and agreed to decide at the next
> meeting based on a [reactji
> poll](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/48#issuecomment-1811097196).
>
> [Jan 2024 meeting
> notes](https://cryptpad.fr/code/#/2/code/edit/Ng7kXl9rCF5qnTQX60UCpDHE/)
> record that we agreed on ByteArray because it was the winner of the poll, and
> we had already agreed to resolve this specific issue by poll among these
> three choices.

## Selector

A string of Unicode code points, differentiated from a proper string by its
type.
Selectors cannot contain lone/unpaired surrogates.

> - **Guile**: symbols `'name`
> - **JavaScript**:
>   ```js
>   {
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle'): 'selector',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: 'name',
>   }
>   ```
> - **Python**: `Selector('name')` where `Selector` is imported from `ocapn`.
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/46
>
> OCapN uses the name selector to avoid the implication that they will
> correspond to a language's symbol type in all languages that have a symbol
> type.

> > Selectors may correspond to symbols in languages where a symbol is elligible

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Selectors may correspond to symbols in languages where a symbol is eligible
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Selectors may correspond to symbols in languages where a symbol is eligible
```

# Container

## List (JSON)

A list of any quantity of values.

> - **Guile**: `'()`
> - **JavaScript** and **JSON**: `[]`
> - **Python**: `()` (We have not discussed whether to use tuple or list. Tuple
>   is less mutable, though enforcing immutability in Python is not likely to be
>   a goal the way it is in hardened JavaScript.)
>
> Lists participate in the JSON subset of OCapN.
>
> We achieved consensus to name the type "List" at the [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94) meeting.

## Struct (JSON)

A struct with unique, unordered string keys and values of heterogeneous type.

> - **Guile**: `make-tbd-hash` a hash of undecided type
> - **JavaScript**: `{}`
> - **Python**: `{}`
>
> For the purposes of surviving a round trip, the order of appearance of
> entries in the struct must not be important for determining equivalence.
> A struct representation concretely using one key order may validly
> round-trip into a struct representation using another key order.
> However, we encourage concrete representations to use some canonical key
> order, though this is not a concern of the abstract syntax and data model.
>

> > A JavaScript object that owns any non-string keys (numbers or symbols) or
> > with a prototype other than `Object.prototype cannot be passed as an OCapN
> > struct as all such objects are reserved for concrete representations of OCapN
> > types.
> > The key `Symbol.for('passStyle')` is special and indicates the kind of OCapN
> > value the object represents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> A JavaScript object that owns any symbol-keyed properties or with a prototype
> other than `Object.prototype` cannot be passed as an OCapN struct, as all such
> objects are reserved for concrete representations of OCapN types.
> The key `Symbol.for('passStyle')` is special and indicates the kind of OCapN
> value represented by an object.
```

## Tagged

A value with a string tag.

> OCapN provides a small number of container types with minimal semantics.
> Tags allow protocols to emerge from values annotated to indicate a richer
> variety of semantics.
> Concretely, a list might be differentiated from or hinted to be an ordered
> list, sorted list, or a set of unique values.
>
> - **Guile**: currently a Guile record labeled `'(syrec ...)` (**imported**)
> - **JavaScript**: an object with the key `Symbol.for('passStyle')` and value
>   `tagged`, with a string tagName and a single `"payload"` field carrying the tagged value.
>   ```js
>   {
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle')]: 'tagged',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: tagName,
>     payload
>   }
>   ```
> - **Python**: `Tagged(tag, value)` where `tag` is a `string` and `Tagged` is
>   imported from `ocapn`.
>
> OCapN tagged data have a single value (are not variadic) [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94)
>
> What are tagged values for? https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/52

> ## Remotable

Author: @tsyesika @cwebber noted at the October 8, 2024 meeting that we should make this term consistent with the spec, either with spec changes or a change right here. Dave Thompson suggests the corresponding term throughout the spec at time of writing is “remote reference”. Agoric makes a distinction between a remote reference and a “remotable”: a remotable is a settled capability that _may_ be local or remote, not strictly remote.

I think that’s a distinction that applies to this abstract model, and it might be that we need to expand this section to indicate a distinction between a “local presence that forwards messages to a remote reference” and a “a local remotable object that may receive messages from local or remote objects”.

Reviewer 5: The OCapN spec currently simply says "Remote References" which I prefer over "Remoteable" personally.

Author: At the November 2024 meeting, we discussed this and resolved that “references” are a category divided between “promise” and “target”, where “targets” have a pass-invariant identity.

We came to this name because the root word “remote” implied that the important distinction between these references and promises is that they can be either “local” or “remote” (or “exported” and “imported” respectively), but that attribute does not distinguish them from promises. The term “target” is intended to capture both of the important distinctions:
- when delivering a message to a reference, the referent may be a promise, but the promise is not the target: it is a conveyance toward the target.
- regardless of whether the target is local or remote, the target has a unique and comparable identity, such that we can establish over OCapN that any pair of references ultimately refer to the same target. We sometimes call this “pass invariant” property of targets “grant matching”. Promises lack this property. In the physical metaphor of “target” a set of concentric circles imply a unique point in space toward which messages (on arrows) converge.

A value that can receive messages.

Remotable values can be either a local value or a remote value that forwards
messages to a local value.
The latter is a presence: a remotable that forwards messages to the peer where the
message can be delivered to its corresponding local remotable.

Comparing the identities of remotable values is pass-invariant, meaning that
comparing the identities of any pair of remotable values will produce the same
result on one peer if passed over OCapN to another peer and compared there,
regardless of whether either value is a presence on either peer.

Although Remotables and Promises are both Capabilities for delivering messages,
Promises do not support pass-invariant identity comparison.

> > - **Guile**: a function

Reviewer 4: s/function/procedure/ but idk a callable actor is not a core concept in Guile, it's a Goblins thing.

Author: Are all Guile procedures eligible targets for message delivery or do they need to be marked with a Guile thing?

Reviewer 2: So I guess there's a bit of a blurring of the lines between Guile and Goblins. In terms of references, Goblins has two object/actor references:

`<local-object-refr>` this is a reference which refers to a guile procedure (the object's/actor's behaviour) that was returned by spawning the actor's constructor.
`<remote-object-refr>` which is a reference to an actor on a remote system.

In addition to those, you can also send messages to promises, there are two equivalent promise references:
- `<local-promise-refr>`
- `<remote-promise-refr>`

When Goblin's CapTP layer gets a message to a `<local-object-refr>` it'll queue that message on the vat's message queue so that the vat invokes that procedure in turn.

Author: Endo/Agoric have analogous local and remote targets, though we just use a JavaScript promise for promises regardless of remote vs local. We call a remote target a “presence” which is just an opaque object that we can send messages to.

Follow-up question: Does Goblins oblige you to wrap a procedure to construct a `<local-object-refr>` in order for it to be able to receive deliveries? In JavaScript, we mark objects with `makeExo(interfaceName, interfaceGuard, methods)`, which is a user mode utility for generating an object that we recognize as an eligible target, as opposed to arbitrary JavaScript objects. This distinction prevents the JavaScript API from implicitly leaking into protocols above CapTP. I imagine this is less necessary for Goblins, but your answer may come to bear on the accuracy of this non-normative example.

> > - **Guile**: a function

Author: ```suggestion
> - **Guile**: a Goblins callable actor
```

Reviewer 4: Maybe just "a Goblins actor"

> Although Remotables and Promises are both Capabilities for delivering messages,
> Promises do not support pass-invariant identity comparison.
> 
> > - **Guile**: a function
> > - **JavaScript**: A *far object* or a *remote presence* of that far object.
> >   ```js
> >   {
> >     __proto__: {
> >       [Symbol.for('passStyle')]: 'remotable',
> >       [Symbol.toStringTag]: allegedInterfaceName,
> >     },
> >     ...methods
> >   }
> >   ```
> > - **Python**: to be proposed
> >
> > Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/49
> 
> ## Promise
> 
> A promise represents the eventual return value (fulfillment) or thrown error
> (rejection reason) for a message delivery.
> 
> Messages delivered to a promise are forwarded to their eventual fulfillment
> value or rejected with the promises's eventual rejection reason.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - **Guile**: a function
> - **JavaScript**: A *far object* or a *remote presence* of that far object.
>   ```js
>   {
>     __proto__: {
>       [Symbol.for('passStyle')]: 'remotable',
>       [Symbol.toStringTag]: allegedInterfaceName,
>     },
>     ...methods
>   }
>   ```
> - **Python**: to be proposed
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/49

## Promise

A promise represents the eventual return value (fulfillment) or thrown error
(rejection reason) for a message delivery.

Messages delivered to a promise are forwarded to their eventual fulfillment
value or rejected with the promises's eventual rejection reason.

Although Remotables and Promises are both Capabilities for delivering messages,
Promises do not support pass-invariant identity comparison.
```

> > - **Guile**: to be proposed

Reviewer 4: There's no promise API in Guile. It's a Goblins addition.

Author: Is this adequate?
```suggestion
> - **Guile**: a Goblins promise
```

> - **JavaScript**: a JavaScript promise
> - **Python**: to be proposed
>
> Tracking https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/55

## Error

A value capturing the reason for rejecting a delivery.

> > - **Guile**: to be proposed

Reviewer 4: This would be an exception object of some kind.

Author: How’s this?
```suggestion
> - **Guile**: an exception
```

Selectors are distinguished from [String](#string)s by type, not content.

> - **Guile**: symbols `'name`
> - **JavaScript**:
>   ```js
>   {
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle'): 'selector',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: 'name',
>   }
>   ```
> - **Python**: `Selector('name')` where `Selector` is imported from `ocapn`.
>
> A selector's content must be expressible in UTF-8.
> Strings in UTF-16 can express unpaired/lone surrogates that cannot be
> expressed in any UTF and so cannot be carried by OCapN.
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/46
>
> OCapN uses the name selector to avoid the implication that they will
> correspond to a language's symbol type in all languages that have a symbol
> type.
> Selectors may correspond to symbols in languages where a symbol is elligible
> for garbage collection when there are no extant references.
> At this time, JavaScript cannot safely use registered symbols like
> `Symbol.for('name')` for OCapN selectors, because registered symbols are
> interned without possibility of eventual garbage collection.
>
> OCapN supports one operator for delivering both function application and
> method invocation.

> > By convention, method invocation is equivalent to function application, where

Reviewer 6: is the method selector (first argument) omitted in the case of function invocation?

in Spritely the method selector (first argument) is #f in function invocation, in E __run was used and in Monte it was run.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 7: > in Spritely the method selector (first argument) is #f in function invocation

If that's true, then we have badly misunderstood how these concepts map to spritely, to a degree that does likely invalidate what we thought we agreed to.

@cwebber , @tsyesika , please clarify. Thanks.

Reviewer 2: It’s not true. When invoking it as a function you simply provide the function arguments as the arguments. No need to pass false or do anything else.

Author: Pardon, this is stale. I’ll update.

Reviewer 6: I thought it was so on the 'wire' of a Spritely captp connection.

Reviewer 2: > I thought it was so on the 'wire' of a Spritely captp connection.

There used to be a dedicated method field on desc:deliver which was set to false on function invocation but it was never really used iirc and was dropped a long time ago

Reviewer 6: s/desc:deliver/op:deliver/ no?

Author: Okay, now seated and looking at what I’ve written, the proposed specification does not suggest that non-method invocation must have False as the first argument. The text is consistent with consensus. I do recall the former idea about `#f`, but it is not current.

A pair of lists are equal or equivalent for purposes of [Pass Invariant
Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) if the are the same length and every
respective value is equal, transitively.

## Struct

([JSON](#json-invariants)†)

A struct with unique, unordered string keys and values of heterogeneous type.

> - **Guile**: `make-tbd-hash` a hash of undecided type
> - **JavaScript**: `{}`
> - **Python**: `{}`
>
> For the purposes of surviving a round trip, the order of appearance of
> entries in the struct must not be important for determining equivalence.
> A struct representation concretely using one key order may validly
> round-trip into a struct representation using another key order.
> However, we encourage concrete representations to use some canonical key
> order, though this is not a concern of the abstract syntax and data model.
>
> A JavaScript object that owns any non-string keys (numbers or symbols) or
> with a prototype other than `Object.prototype` cannot be passed as an OCapN
> struct.
> The key `Symbol.for('passStyle')` is special and indicates the kind of OCapN
> value the object represents.

A pair of structs are equal or equivalent for purposes of [Pass Invariant

> Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) if they mutually posess a value for every

Author: Insert _posse comitatus_ pun.

This document captures a summary of consensus and remaining contention for the
OCapN data model and abstract syntax, excluding the concern of concrete
representation of these on the wire, but including non-normative
representations in a selection of implementation languages.

Commentary in block quotes is not normative.

> Non-normative commentary.

# Value

A value is any [Atom](#atom), [Container](#container),
[Reference](#reference-capability), or [Error](#error).

Atoms:

- [Undefined](#undefined)
- [Null](#null)
- [Boolean](#boolean)
- [Integer](#integer)
- [Float64](#float64)
- [String](#string)
- [ByteArray](#bytearray)
- [Selector](#selector)

Containers:

- [List](#list)
- [Struct](#struct)
- [Tagged](#tagged)

References:

- [Target](#target)
- [Promise](#promise)

# Atom

> Atoms are values that do not contain or refer to other values.

Author: No labyrinth can contain you.

> to round-trip all numbers except NaNs, infinities, and negative zero, but all
> other numbers expressible with an IEEE 754 double-precision float to survive a
> round trip without loss of precision.
> We also do not expect integers expressed with higher precision in JSON to
> survive a round-trip through an OCapN-compatible JSON codec.
>
> Consensus on preserving -0:
> - As of May 16, @erights insisted that -0 round trip to 0 https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1550020450
> - On May 23, @zenhack proposed preserving -0 https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1560116857
> - We converged out of band and Agoric has committed to preserving -0 https://github.com/endojs/endo/issues/1602

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality):
- Every finite Float64 is equal to any other Float64 with the same bitwise
  representation.
- Every infinite Float64 is equal to any other infinite Float64 of the same
  sign.
- There is only one NaN value and it is equal to itself.

> JavaScript's `Object.is` is consistent with Pass Invariant Equality, whereas
> `==` and `===` are not.

## String

([JSON](#json-invariants)†)

> A string of Unicode code points excluding lone (or unpaired) surrogates
> (U+D800-U+DFFF).
> Strings are distinguished from [Selector](#selector) s by type, not content.

Reviewer 3: Surrogate code _points_ can never be "paired".
```suggestion
A sequence of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).
An implementation of OCapN in JavaScript or another language in which
strings are based on UTF-16 may include 16-bit surrogate code _units_
(0xD800-0xDFFF), but only as part of a surrogate pair which encodes a
single code point greater than or equal to U+10000 (i.e., each OCapN
string can be encoded into a well-formed Unicode string in any encoding
form).

Strings are distinguished from [Selector](#selector)s by type, not content.
```

> - **Guile**: `""`
> - **JavaScript**: `''`
> - **Python**: `''`
>

> > †Strings participate in the [JSON subset](#json-invariants) of OCapN except
> > any strings that contain unpaired/lone surrogates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> †Strings participate in the [JSON subset](#json-invariants) of OCapN except
> any strings that contain surrogate code points.
```

>
> A string's content must be expressible in UTF-8.
> Some two-byte Unicode encodings, as in JavaScript strings, can contain
> unpaired/lone surrogates that have no valid expression in any UTF and so
> cannot be carried by OCapN.
>
> Notes: [January 2024 meeting
> notes](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/blob/main/meeting-minutes/2024-01-09.md)
> record that we agreed that strings can only be well-formed Unicode, i.e.,
> cannot contain unpaired surrogates.
> For JavaScript, if a string does not pass [the `isWellFormed`
> predicate](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-is-usv-string), then it is not a
> Passable string.

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality), a pair of
Strings are equal if they have the same quantity of Unicode code points and
have the same respective Unicode code points in order.

## ByteArray

> An array of bytes.

Reviewer 3: This may be _too_ pedantic, but...
```suggestion
An array of 8-bit bytes.
```

> - **Guile**: `#vu8()`
> - **JavaScript**: `new ArrayBuffer()`
> - **Python**: `b''`
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/48
>
> At the [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94) meeting,
> we agreed to settle on the prefix "byte" and agreed to decide at the next
> meeting based on a [reactji
> poll](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/48#issuecomment-1811097196).
>
> [January 2024 meeting
> notes](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/blob/main/meeting-minutes/2024-01-09.md)
> record that we agreed on ByteArray because it was the winner of the poll, and
> we had already agreed to resolve this specific issue by poll among these
> three choices.
>
> The JavaScript representation of a ByteArray is an `ArrayBuffer` which may
> be made immutable with the proposed JavaScript [Immutable
> ArrayBuffer](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-immutable-arraybuffer) feature.

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality), a pair of
ByteArrays are equal if they have the same quantity of bytes and have the same
respective bytes in order.

## Selector

> A string of Unicode code points excluding lone (or unpaired) surrogates
> (U+D800-U+DFFF).
> Selectors are distinguished from [String](#string)s by type, not content.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A sequence of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).
An implementation of OCapN in JavaScript or another language in which
strings are based on UTF-16 may include 16-bit surrogate code _units_
(0xD800-0xDFFF), but only as part of a surrogate pair which encodes a
single code point greater than or equal to U+10000 (i.e., each OCapN
string can be encoded into a well-formed Unicode string in any encoding
form).

Selectors are distinguished from [String](#string)s by type, not content.
```

Author: I’ve doctored this into the non-normative qualifier below the example and synced it with selector instead.

```
> A string/selector's content must be expressible in UTF-8.
> Some two-byte Unicode encodings, as in JavaScript strings, can contain
> 16-bit surrogate code _units_ in the range from 0xD800-0xDFFF.
> Pairs of surrogate code units correspond to a single Unicode code _point_
> greater than or equal to U-10000 and can be expressed in UTF-8.
> However unpaired or lone surrogates have no valid expression in any UTF
> and so cannot be carried by OCapN.

```

> - **Guile**: symbols `'name`
> - **JavaScript**: an object with two own properties:
>   for the registered symbol key `passStyle`, the value is the string
>   `selector`; and
>   for the well-known symbol `toStringTag`, the value is the selector.
>   ```js
>   ({
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle'): 'selector',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: 'name',
>   })
>   ```
> - **Python**: `Selector('name')` where `Selector` is imported from `ocapn`.
>
> A selector's content must be expressible in UTF-8.

> > Strings in UTF-16 can express unpaired/lone surrogates that cannot be
> > expressed in any UTF and so cannot be carried by OCapN.

Reviewer 3: UTF-16 does not allow unpaired surrogates, but the arbitrary 16-bit UCS-2/"WTF-16" encoding used in e.g. JavaScript does.

```suggestion
> Some two-byte Unicode encodings, as in JavaScript strings, can contain
> unpaired/lone surrogates that have no valid expression in any UTF and so
> cannot be carried by OCapN.
```

All values passable between OCapN peers have a single, invariant type.
A value sent from one peer and received in another will have the same OCapN
type in both peers.
For any value sent from a local peer to a remote peer then returned to the
local peer, the sent and received values will have the same type.

## Pass Invariant Equality

OCapN defines a flavor of equality, nominally Equality.
Two values may be Equal under Equality.
Values of different OCapN types are not Equal.
Values of the same OCapN type may be Equal under conditions specific to their
shared type.
All OCapN types maintain pass invariant Equality except Promise and
(tentatively) Error.

All OCapN implementations, regardless of language, must model all OCapN types
such that Equality for the in-language representation of values is consistent
with the Equality and Pass Invariance of Equality for their corresponding OCapN
model type.

A type holds Equality invariant over passage between OCapN peers.
Any pair of local values that are Equal can be passed to another peer and the
respective remote values will also be Equal.

It follows that, for any local value that is sent to a remote peer and then returned,

> the sent and received values will be Equal.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/pull/125#discussion_r1854557565
> I don't think this characterization is quite strong enough—wouldn't it be incorrectly satisfied if a remote peer were to factor in the source from which it receives a value? We want to cover invariance on _all_ peers.

> OCapN Equal values may be locally distinguishable by other operators
> depending on the language implementation and type.

> In JavaScript, none of `==`, `===`, or `Object.is` are sufficient to compare
> Equality of values, which instead must take into account the OCapN type for
> each value.
> For example, Float64 can be compared by `Object.is`, which preserves the
> distinction between 0 and -0 and lack of distinction between any two NaN
> values.
> `Object.is` is also sufficient for Target provided that the OCapN
> implementation holds invariant a single object identity for every Target.
> The JavaScript ArrayBuffer representation of an OCapN ByteArray must be
> compared byte-for-byte.

> > Also, Object.is doesn't work on Container because container equality is based
> > on recursive equality of the contents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Also, `Object.is` is not sufficient for Container because container
> equality is based on recursive equality of the contents.
```

# JSON Invariants

OCapN holds invariant that:

- Any JSON text that a JavaScript peer can produce using
  `JSON.stringify`,

> - excluding those in which the Unicode representation of any object member name
>   or string includes a surrogate,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- excluding those in which the Unicode representation of any object member name
  or string includes a surrogate code point,
```

This document captures a summary of consensus and remaining contention for the
OCapN data model and abstract syntax, excluding the concern of concrete
representation of these on the wire, but including non-normative
representations in a selection of implementation languages.

Commentary in block quotes is not normative.

> Non-normative commentary.

# Value

A value is any [Atom](#atom), [Container](#container), [Reference](#reference),
or [Error](#error).

Atoms:

- [Undefined](#undefined)

> - [Null](#null)

Author: I moved the reference into the first line of the body of the section to uncomplicate the links.

that owns a property with the value `null` for that key.

> Consequently, `JSON.stringify` for the same OCapN struct will have
> a property with the value `null` in the generated JSON object.

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality),
there is only one Null value and it is equal to itself.

OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) on
any [Atom](#atom).

## Boolean ([JSON](#json-invariants))

A value that is either true or false.

> - **Guile**: `#f`, `#t`
> - **JavaScript** and **JSON**: `false`, `true`
> - **Python**: `False`, `True`

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality),
the values True and False are equal only to their respective selves.

OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) on
any [Atom](#atom).

## Integer

An arbitrary precision signed integer.

> - **Guile**: `-1`, `0`, `1`
> - **JavaScript**: `-1n`, `0n`, `1n`
> - **Python**: `-1`, `0`, `1`
>
> Note: We achieved consensus on the name `Integer` at the [November 14, 2023
> meeting](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94).

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality), every

> Integer value is only equal to other Integers with the same magnitude.

Author: Adopted markm’s recommended “same arithmetic integer” prose instead.

> survive a round-trip through an OCapN-compatible JSON codec.
>
> Consensus on preserving -0:
> - As of May 16, @erights insisted that -0 round trip to 0 https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1550020450
> - On May 23, @zenhack proposed preserving -0 https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/5#issuecomment-1560116857
> - We converged out of band and Agoric has committed to preserving -0 https://github.com/endojs/endo/issues/1602

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality):
- Every finite Float64 is equal to any other Float64 with the same bitwise
  representation.
- Every infinite Float64 is equal to any other infinite Float64 of the same
  sign.
- There is only one NaN value and it is equal to itself.

> JavaScript's `Object.is` is consistent with Pass Invariant Equality, whereas
> `==` and `===` are not.

OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) on
any [Atom](#atom).

## String ([JSON](#json-invariants)†)

A string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).
Strings are distinguished from [Selector](#selector) s by type, not content.

> > - **Guile**: `""`
> > - **JavaScript**: `''`
> > - **Python**: `''`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - **Guile** and **JSON**: `""`
> - **JavaScript**: `''` or `""`
> - **Python**: `''` or `""`
```

> > - **Python**: `''`

Author: Electing to omit since these are examples and not exhaustive. May revisit JSON holistically.

> meeting based on a [reactji
> poll](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/48#issuecomment-1811097196).
>
> [January 2024 meeting
> notes](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/blob/main/meeting-minutes/2024-01-09.md)
> record that we agreed on ByteArray because it was the winner of the poll, and
> we had already agreed to resolve this specific issue by poll among these
> three choices.
>
> The JavaScript representation of a ByteArray is an `ArrayBuffer` which may
> be made immutable with the proposed JavaScript [Immutable
> ArrayBuffer](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-immutable-arraybuffer) feature.

For purposes of [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality), a pair of
ByteArrays are equal if they have the same quantity of bytes and have the same
respective bytes in order.

OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) on
any [Atom](#atom).

> Notably, imposing identity invariants for JavaScript ArrayBuffer would put
> an undue performance burden for OCapN sessions, as they would need to intern
> all reachable ByteArrays for the duration of the session and search for
> an equivalent ArrayBuffer for every received ByteArray.

> ## Selector

Reviewer 3: Nit: Given the similarity of their definitions, I would find it convenient for Selector to appear adjacent to String, moving ByteArray out from in between them.

A string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).
Selectors are distinguished from [String](#string)s by type, not content.

> - **Guile**: symbols `'name`
> - **JavaScript**: an object with two own properties:
>   for the registered symbol key `passStyle`, the value is the string
>   `selector`; and

> >   for the well-known symbol `toStringTag`, the value is the selector.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>   for the well-known symbol `toStringTag`, the value is a string containing
>   the code points of the selector.
```

>   ```js

> >   ({
> >     [Symbol.for('passStyle'): 'selector',
> >     [Symbol.toStringTag]: 'name',
> >   })

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>   ({
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle')]: 'selector',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: 'name',
>   })
```

>   ```
> - **Python**: `Selector('name')` where `Selector` is imported from `ocapn`.
>
> A selector's content must be expressible in UTF-8.
> Strings in UTF-16 can express unpaired/lone surrogates that cannot be
> expressed in any UTF and so cannot be carried by OCapN.
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/46
>
> OCapN uses the name Selector to avoid the implication that they will
> correspond to a language's symbol type in all languages that have a symbol
> type.
> Selectors may correspond to symbols in languages where a symbol is elligible
> for garbage collection when there are no extant references.
> At this time, JavaScript cannot safely use registered symbols like

> > `Symbol.for('name')` for OCapN selectors, because registered symbols are
> > interned without possibility of eventual garbage collection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> `Symbol.for('name')` for OCapN selectors, because some implementations intern
> such symbols without possibility of eventual garbage collection.
```

Selectors are equal if they have the same quantity of Unicode code points and
have the same respective Unicode code points in order.

OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) on
any [Atom](#atom).

# Container

A container is a value that contains other values.

## List ([JSON](#json-invariants))

A list of any quantity of values.

> - **Guile**: `'()`
> - **JavaScript** and **JSON**: `[]`
> - **Python**: `()` (We have not discussed whether to use tuple or list. Tuple
>   is less mutable, though enforcing immutability in Python is not likely to be
>   a goal the way it is in hardened JavaScript.)
>
> Lists participate in the JSON subset of OCapN.
>
> We achieved consensus to name the type "List" at the [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94) meeting.

A pair of lists are equal or equivalent for purposes of [Pass Invariant
Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) if the are the same length and every
respective value is equal, transitively.

OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) on
lists.

## Struct ([JSON](#json-invariants))

> A struct with unique, unordered string keys and values of heterogeneous type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A collection of unordered (key, value) pairs.
Each key must be a string, and must be unique within a Struct.
Values within a Struct may be of heterogeneous type.
```

> round-trip into a struct representation using another key order.
> However, we encourage concrete representations to use some canonical key
> order, though this is not a concern of the abstract syntax and data model.
>
> A JavaScript object that owns any non-string keys (numbers or symbols) or
> with a prototype other than `Object.prototype cannot be passed as an OCapN
> struct as all such objects are reserved for concrete representations of OCapN
> types.
> The key `Symbol.for('passStyle')` is special and indicates the kind of OCapN
> value the object represents.

A pair of structs are equal or equivalent for purposes of [Pass Invariant
Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) if they mutually posess a value for every
key in the other struct and every respective value is equal to their own,
transitively.

> A pair of structs may be equivalent regardless of the order of appearance of
> fields.
> OCapN implementations will likely sort keys of structs according to code
> points in order in the concrete representation of a struct.

OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) on
any [Container](#container).

## Tagged

> A [Value](#value) with a tag.
> The value may be any value.
> The tag is a string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A pair consisting of a tag and a [Value](#value).
The tag must be a [String](#string).
```

> ("Remote Procedure Calls") as they are the basis of
> [Promise Pipelining](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futures_and_promises#Promise_pipelining).

## Target

Targets represent either a local value or a remote value.
OCapN can export references to local targets and can import references to
remote targets.
A local target handles deliveries and produces either a return value
(fulfillment) or thrown error (rejection reason) for a message delivery.
A remote target (a presence) forwards messages to its corresponding local target.

> - **Guile**: a procedure
> - **JavaScript**: tentatively and aspirationally, an object with three own
>   properties:
>   for the registered symbol `passStyle`, the value is the string `target`,
>   for the well-known symbol `toStringTag`, the value is the alleged name of the
>   target's interface for diagnostics; and
>   for the string name `deliver`, the value is a function that receives the
>   delivery arguments and returns or throws the resolution of the delivery's
>   promise.
>   ```js
>   ({
>     [Symbol.for('passStyle')]: 'target',
>     [Symbol.toStringTag]: allegedInterfaceName,
>     deliver(...args) {},
>   })

> >   ```

Author: In preparation for seeking adoption of this model at the December 10 OCapN meeting, I am tentatively removing the JavaScript example ("to be proposed"). Reminder: all examples are non-normative comments.

> - **Python**: to be proposed
>
> The Endo JavaScript implementation of OCapN will likely continue to also accept
> targets that are only suitable for method invocation in the form of an object
> that, for the registered symbol `passStyle` own key, has the string value
> `remotable`; for the well-known symbol `toStringTag` has a string value
> indicating a diagnostic name for the target's alleged interface; and
> all remaining string keys correspond to methods that should be invoked
> for any delivery where the first argument is the equivalent Selector to the
> method name, passing all remaining arguments to the method.
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/49

Targets have [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity).
A target might be sent from a local peer to a remote peer, then the remote peer
may send that target back to the local peer.
The sent target will be identical to the received target and no other value.

> OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) on
> any [Reference](#reference).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OCapN does not impose [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) on
any [Reference](#reference-capability).
```
(but independent of that, I agree with @erights—I think References _do_ require Pass Invariant Equality, and AFAICT Pass Invariant Identity should be defined to logically imply Pass Invariant Equality).

## Promise

A promise represents the eventual return value (fulfillment) or thrown error
(rejection reason) for a message delivery.
A promise is pending until settled with either a fulfillment or rejection reson.
Messages delivered to a promise are forwarded to their eventual fulfillment

> value or rejected with the promises's eventual rejection reason.

Reviewer 7: Noting that we do not do this now, at least not always, and might never choose to do so. Though I agree that the meaning of deliverying a message to a non-ocapn-target is outside the meaning of ocapn. For the endo and swingset ocapn language binding implementation, atoms and containers might still have js method behaviors, and I think our systems will, at least sometimes, invoke these when a promise fulfills to one.

Would be good to test.

> value or rejected with the promises's eventual rejection reason.

Author: I’m revising this to be more specific. Promises forward messages only to the fulfillment value if that value is a Reference/Capability. I did not intentionally imply messages would be forwarded to values and containers, which would leak language-specific protocols.

> - **Guile**: to be proposed
> - **JavaScript**: a JavaScript promise
> - **Python**: to be proposed
>
> Tracking https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/55

OCapN does not maintain [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity) nor
[Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) for promises.

As with all other types, OCapN does maintain [Pass Invariant
Type](#pass-invariant-type) such that a local promise sent to a a remote peer
arrives as a promise, regardless of whether it is pending or settled locally.

OCapN maintains that, if a local promise is sent to a remote peer and then
retuned, either the fulfillment value or the rejection reason of the sent and

> received promises will satisfy the pass invariants applicable to their type.

Reviewer 7: Unless "and then returned" serves a purpose I'm missing, which is quite possible.

> received promises will satisfy the pass invariants applicable to their type.

Author: I’ve revisited this and broken it into corollaries. The first is maintaining the invariant over passage. The second implying invariance for a round-trip.

> For example, if the sent promise settles with a fulfillment value that is a
> Target, the sent and received targets will be identical, because Targets
> maintain [Pass Invariant Identity](#pass-invariant-identity).
>
> For another example, if the sent promise settles with a fulfillment value
> that is a Struct, the sent and received structs will be equal, because
> all [Containers](#container) maintain [Pass Invariant
> Equality](#pass-invariant-equality), but the structs may not be identical.
> OCapN doesn't explicitly forbid identity for passed structs, but interning
> structs for the duration of an OCapN session in order to preserve identity

> > for all equivalent structs is prohibitively expensive in most languages.

Reviewer 7: Still seems consistent with the idea that "identity" is not usefully an ocapn concept, but rather useful to only describe expected features of language bindings.

> > for all equivalent structs is prohibitively expensive in most languages.

Author: Thanks. I was confused. I am merging Identity and Equality into Equality. They did not overlap.

> even for types in one language.
> Pass Invariant Identity obliges OCapN to track a value's identity until the value
> becomes unreachable.

OCapN holds identity invariant only for values of type [Target](#target).

OCapN does not hold identity invariant for values of type [Promise](#promise).

OCapN does not guarantee identity is invariant for any values of [Atom](#atom)
or [Container](#container) types.

> Notably, in JavaScript, all Atomc types have trivial Pass Invariant Identity
> except the JavaScript `ArrayBuffer` for an OCapN [ByteArray](#bytearray) and
> the JavaScript object representation of an OCapN [Selector](#selector).
> OCapN does not obligate a JavaScript implementation to intern a single identity
> for all equivalent ByteArrays or Selectors.

# JSON Invariants

OCapN holds invariant that:

- Any JSON document that a JavaScript peer can produce using
  `JSON.stringify`,
- excluding those that contain any Unicode surrogates,
- can then be read back with `JSON.parse`,
- sent to any other OCapN peer,
- returned from any OCapN peer,
- then saved back to an identical JSON document with `JSON.stringify`.

> > For this reason, OCapN supports distinct a distinct [Undefined](#undefined)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
> For this reason, OCapN supports a distinct [Undefined](#undefined)
```

> A value representing `null` as distinct from `undefined` in JSON.

Author: I’ve made this more specific and linked a section on JSON invariants.

## String (JSON\*)

A string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).
Strings are distinguished from [Selector](#selector) s by type, not content.

> - **Guile**: `""`
> - **JavaScript**: `''`
> - **Python**: `''`
>
> A string's content must be expressible in UTF-8.

> > Strings in UTF-16 can express unpaired/lone surrogates that cannot be

Author: I’m cleaning this up to just say “some two-byte representations including JavaScript strings”.

> expressed in any UTF and so cannot be carried by OCapN.
>

> > \*Strings participate in the JSON subset of OCapN except any strings that

Author: Some flavors of Markdown get confused about whether a literal `*` indicates a bullet. I’ll change these to daggers† to avoid the problem.

> JavaScript's `Object.is` is consistent with Pass Invariant Equality, whereas
> `==` and `===` are not.

## String

([JSON](#json-invariants)†)

> A string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).

Reviewer 3: This is correct as written, but it's true that people often confuse code points and code units. Perhaps a note?
> Well-formed UTF-16 can include 16-bit code _units_ in the inclusive range 0xD800-0xDFFF, but only as part of a surrogate pair which encodes a single code point greater than or equal to U+10000. Any code unit sequence including an unpaired surrogate is ill-formed and thus not an OCapN String (i.e., each OCapN string can be encoded into a well-formed Unicode string in any encoding form).

> A string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).

Author: I have gone back and forth on this. “Excluding surrogates” is a stronger normative requirement, albeit less clear.

> A string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).

Author: I am now committing an editorial change to both String and Selector that maintains "surrogate" (implied code point, and as such, pairing code units is not a thing, and expanded the non-normative explanation and implication for unpaired surrogate code units)

>   ```
> - **Python**: `Selector('name')` where `Selector` is imported from `ocapn`.
>
> A selector's content must be expressible in UTF-8.
> Strings in UTF-16 can express unpaired/lone surrogates that cannot be
> expressed in any UTF and so cannot be carried by OCapN.
>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/46
>

> > OCapN uses the name selector to avoid the implication that they will

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
> OCapN uses the name `selector` to avoid the implication that they will
```

Author: Chose to TitleCase as that’s the prevailing style.

Reviewer 7: What?

Author: I removed the back-ticks and promoted the case of “selector” to “Selector” to denote a pronoun, which I’m now using consistently to distinguish casual nouns from nouns with OCapN definitions.

## Tagged

A [Value](#value) with a tag.
The value may be any value.
The tag is a string of Unicode code points excluding surrogates (U+D800-U+DFFF).

> OCapN provides a small number of container types with minimal semantics.
> Tags allow protocols to emerge from values annotated to indicate a richer
> variety of semantics.
> Concretely, a list might be differentiated from or hinted to be an ordered
> list, sorted list, or a set of unique values.
>
> - **Guile**: currently a Guile record labeled `'(make-tagged 'tagName 10)` (**imported**)
> - **JavaScript**: an object with the key `Symbol.for('passStyle')` and value

> >   `tagged`, with a string tagName and a single `"payload"` field carrying the tagged value.

Reviewer 7: Good that the code example here and in `Selector` are similar. The text decorating that code should be similar too.

Author: I’ve posted a commit that regularizes the JavaScript examples in the cases where they’re objects with a passStyle.

>   }
>   ```
> - **Python**: `Tagged('tagName', value)` where `tag` is a `string` and `Tagged` is
>   imported from `ocapn`.
>
> OCapN tagged data have a single value (are not variadic) [November 14, 2023](https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/94)
>
> What are tagged values for? https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/52

## Error

A value capturing the reason for rejecting a delivery.

> - **Guile**: to be proposed
> - **JavaScript**: a JavaScript Error object
> - **Python**: to be proposed
>
> We have not yet converged on any particular details about the modeling of
> errors. The purpose of errors is typically to indicate that some requested
> operation failed. The purpose of the contents of errors is to preserve and
> convey diagnostic information, mostly to help debug problems, such as the
> root cause of a surprising failure. This is a best-efforts obligation, for
> which we have not yet decided either what contents are required, nor what is
> allowed, nor what must be preserved as errors are passed from one site to
> another. Until these details are decided, the only hard requirement is that
> an error round trip to an error. We avoid any interpretation for now as to

> > whether it is the "same" error.

Reviewer 7: Well said. Should have a tracking issue

Author: Adding a link to https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/142

> # Reference

Reviewer 7: Saying `Reference` rather than `Capability` seemed good to me at first. But we name the protocol `ocapn` and make a big deal of it being a distributed capability protocol. This is where those capabilities appear. Calling these capabilities means there's one less concept to explain.

Author: Pending feedback from @cwebber and @tsyesika, I’ll for now use Reference as the primary name and Capability as its epithet in parentheses.

> A value that can receive messages, either a Target or Promise.

Reviewer 7: `Reference` and `Container` have an introductory one liner before the subheadings. Could we have one for `Atom` too?

Author: If you will allow it to be circular 😉.

## Target

Targets represent either a local value or a remote value.
OCapN can export references to local targets and can import references to
remote targets.
A local target handles deliveries and produces either a return value
(fulfillment) or thrown error (rejection reason) for a message delivery.
A remote target (a presence) forwards messages to its corresponding local target.

> - **Guile**: a procedure
> - **JavaScript**: Tentatively, *far object* (can handle message deliveries
>   locally) or a *presence* (a token object that forwards messages to a
>   corresponding far object).
>   ```js
>   {

> >     __proto__: {

Reviewer 7: Need to say something about the `__proto__`. Also, the actual remotable object is an object that inherits from the object shown, possibly through multiple levels, each contributing their own methods.

Again, would be good for all such code examples to have similar enough text to help people reason by similarity and difference.

Author: We could also add a case to `pass-style` such that any `x` where `typeof x === 'function'` is a valid target and revise `Far` and `exo` to use that as their foundation, obviating this detail.

Reviewer 7: I do not believe we should do that, but it is arguable. I'll  leave the reasons to a verbal discussion sometime.

Reviewer 7: In any case, it would be a huge change that we're not likely to consider anytime soon. It would be good to have the JS examples reflect current endo reality.

Reviewer 7: Simple (and IMO adequate) reason not to consider unmarked functions to be targets by default:

We are trying really hard to shift 
- from a local E-like hardened js programming model where every object and function boundary should be a defensive boundary
- to a local endo programming model where, in general, the defensive boundaries are target invocation boundaries, where targets are typically exos protected by interface guards.

For example, one of the reasons I find our shift towards more direct support of ts acceptable, despite typescript's unsound type system, is that to the exo programmer, the relevant type-like system for defensive exo boundaries will be the declarative interface guards, where the ts types directly inferred from these guards are both static and sound.

Admitting unmarked functions by default as targets would completely undo the progress we've made towards this coarsening of defensive boundaries.

Author: I’ll retract the proposition that we allow all bare JavaScript functions to be valid targets.

A problem with documenting Endo reality here is that it is not sufficient to express a target that can receive an arbitrary delivery. We could document Endo reality as a special case, but the general case ought to be a marked function, e.g.,

```js
({
  [Symbol.for('passStyle')]: 'target',
  target: (...args) => {},
})
```

Given that these non-normative sections are for examples and not per-language specifications, I find that the general case is sufficient for now, provided that you concur.

Author: For the record, @erights does not concur and I’ve removed the example, since no example that is sufficiently expressive to receive an arbitrary delivery yet exists for JavaScript.

> OCapN implementations will likely sort keys of structs according to code

> > points in order in the concrete representation of a struct.

Author: Removing.

>
> Tracking: https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/49

Targets have [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality).
A target might be sent from a local peer to a remote peer, then the remote peer
may send that target back to the local peer.
The sent target will be equal to the received target.

> The operator for establishing equality is specific to the implementation
> language.
> For JavaScript, the Pass-Invariant Equal operator is `Object.is`.

Although Targets and Promises are both References for delivering messages,

> OCapn does not maintain pass invariance for promises.

Reviewer 7: There is no pass-invariant promise *identity* or *equality*. However you want to put it.

As with errors, promises must round trip only to promises. This is the testable part.

The less testable part, but still part of the pass invariance of the semantics:

A promise's eventual settlement must be pass invariant. IOW, if pa in peer a, when passed to peer b results in pb, then (possibly aside from disconnection/partition trauma), pa must eventually settle iff pb eventually settles. And their settlements must be the "same" up to pass invariance.

If we allow differential disconnection/partition trauma to result in promise rejection, then we'd instead make a similar statement about fulfillment:

A promise's fulfillment settlement must be pass invariant. IOW, if pa in peer a, when passed to peer b results in pb, then, if either pa or pb eventually fulfills, the other must either eventualy fulfill to the "same" value up to pass invariance, or it must reject (with a reason indicating disconnection/partition? Do we want ocapn to stdize such a distinction?)

Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) if the tag and value are equivalent,

> transitively.

Reviewer 7: Well, now that we've gotten rid of the unnecessary distinction between identity and equality, can we also dispense with "equivalent" and just speak of "equality"? What does talk of equivalence add to the meaning of this sentence?

>
> Tracking https://github.com/ocapn/ocapn/issues/55

OCapN does not maintain [Pass Invariant Equality](#pass-invariant-equality) for

> promises.

Reviewer 7: Yes, this says it correctly.

# Pass Invariant

> Any property that holds both locally and remotely between a pair of OCapN peers
> during a session is a Pass Invariant.
> For example, for some value types, OCapN maintains invariant that any pair of
> values of that type, if and only if those values are Equal locally, they will
> be equal remotely.
> Furthermore, if the remote peer sends one value back, it will remain equal to
> the value retained locally.

## Pass Invariant Equality

A type holds Equality invariant over passage between OCapN peers if values of that
type can be passed from a local peer to a remote peer, then returned to the local peer,
and the value that was sent is Equal to the value received.

> The operators necessary for checking Equality may vary for each language and even
> for types in one language.

> > For example, `Object.is`

Reviewer 7: Actually, you should use `Object.is` as a clarifying counter-example. Containers do ***NOT*** have pass invariant `Object.is` equality.

Author: I began the adventure of writing in pass-invariant equality for every model type and quickly mired in details and exceptions that are outside consensus. We can’t yet say that Errors (which are Containers) are not pass-invariant by `Object.is` (lacking consensus about errors, which either need to be or be associated with a capability) and we also can’t say that ByteArrays (Atoms) are pass-invariant by `Object.is`. I believe we need a new issue on Pass-Invariant Equality and to fold that detail in follow-up. To that end, I can leave Pass-Invariant Equality for References or pull it out for a later holistic treatment.

Reviewer 7: If we cannot settle this here, then we should postpone to a later PR. But I believe we've already committed to clear answers to all of these, with the possible exception of errors, and I'm happy with those answers:

- The pass-invariant ocapn equality of ***Targets*** is correctly reflected in JS as `Object.is`

- The pass-invariant ocapn equality of ***Atoms*** that are represented in JS by ***JS primitives*** is correctly reflected in JS as `Object.is`.

- The pass-invariant ocapn equality of ***ByteArrays***, because they are represented in JS as non-JS primitives that we are *not* going to intern, cannot be reflected in JS as `Object.is`. Note that this awkward difference in the JS behavior associated with ocapn Strings vs ocapn ByteArrays affects only the JS programmer. No such asymmetry bleeds into the ocapn level.

- The pass-invariant ocapn equality of ***Containers*** --- Lists, Structs, Taggeds --- is most definitely not reflected in JS as `Object.is`.

- OCapN ***Promises*** have no pass-invariant ocapn equality, so the question of `Object.js` applied to the JS representation of an ocapn promises does not arise. Other pass-invariant aspects of promises, like that they remain promises, and whatever we specify wrt observable settlement, are not *equality* invariants.

IMO, the only hard one:

- OCapN ***Errors*** have no pass-invariant ocapn equality, so the question of `Object.js` applied to the JS representation of an ocapn errors does not arise. Other pass-invariant aspects of errors, like that they remain errors, and that at least some of their properties (like `name` but TBD) are considered semantic and must round trip, are not *equality* invariants.

The reason the Error case is so problematic is that, for diagnostic purposes only, they carry an associated identity (variously referred to an an `errorId`) for looking up associated out-of-band diagnostic info. The naming of this identity will somehow need to be reflected in the ocapn wire protocol. It remains to be seen whether we succeed at specifying this while maintaining a clear separation between semantics and diagnostics. If this separation collapses, errors may indeed come to have cap-like unforgeable identity. But I really hope we can keep this distinction, and IMO we should proceed to try because we may succeed.

But, because of the remaining uncertainty about errors, perhaps this part alone should be postponed to a later PR.

Reviewer 7: Having written out the above response, I'm wondering about this new classification of Errors as Containers as well. For now, until we understand errors better, what do you think of just having them be their own distinct category outside of Atom, Container, Reference/Capability?

Author: I’ll tentatively move Error into its own category, pending consensus on whether it is a container or reference.

## Pass Invariant Equality

OCapN defines a flavor of equality, nominally Equality.
Two values may be Equal under Equality.
Values of different OCapN types are not Equal.
Values of the same OCapN type may be Equal under conditions specific to their
shared type.

> All OCapN types maintain pass invariant Equality except Promise.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
All OCapN types maintain pass invariant Equality except Promise and (at least for now) Error.
```

All OCapN implementations, regardless of language, must model all OCapN types
such that Equality for the in-language representation of values is consistent
with the Equality and Pass Invariance of Equality for their corresponding OCapN

> model type.

Reviewer 7: Why? This seems both wrong as a concrete requirement and none of ocapn's business. It should be up to each language binding.

It is certainly wrong as stated, because it seems to refer to one of the language's existing notions of equality. For the endo binding, there is no JavaScript-level equality concept that corresponds to ocapn equality. Rather, the endo ocapn binding itself provides new equality predicates that, together, do correspond to ocapn equality. However, at least currently, we do not provide a single equality predicate that does so directly.

Author: I’m just going to remove for now, for tentative lack of verbiage that expresses my intent. I’m trying to express a constraint about a transitive round-trip invariant.

Reviewer 7: I suspected that was what you were trying to get at. How about we talk about a language binding as a pair of functions, (naming? marshal/unmarshal, encode/decode, serialize/unserialize, f/g ?) where 
- f(passable-lanuage-value) -> ocapn-value
- g(ocapn-value) -> passable-language-value

and then state the round tripping requirement for the language side as 

for all ocapn-values `ov`, `ocapn-equal(ov, f(g(ov)))`

IOW, they round trip through the language-binding preserving ocapn equality.

A type holds Equality invariant over passage between OCapN peers because any
pair of local values that are Equal can be passed to another and the remote

> values will also be Equal.

Reviewer 7: I'm not sure what this sentence is trying to mean.

Author: Riffing on this:
```
A type holds Equality invariant over passage between OCapN peers.
Any pair of local values that are Equal can be passed to another peer and the
respective remote values will also be Equal.

It follows that, for any local value that is sent to a remote peer and then returned,
the sent and received values will be Equal.
```

It follows that, for any local value that is sent to a remote peer and then returned,
the sent and received values will be Equal.

> > OCapN Equal values may be locally distinguishable by oother operators

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
> OCapN Equal values may be locally distinguishable by other operators
```

Author: I do not regret this keyboard layout, because it ameliorates my emacs-claw, but it does have a cost.

> depending on the language implementation and type.

> In JavaScript, none of `==`, `===`, or `Object.is` are sufficient to compare
> Equality of values, which instead must take into account the OCapN type for
> each value.
> For example, Float64 can be compared by `Object.is`, which preserves the
> distinction between 0 and -0 and lack of distinction between any two NaN
> values.
> `Object.is` is also sufficient for Target provided that the OCapN
> implementation holds invariant a single object identity for every Target.
> The JavaScript ArrayBuffer representation of an OCapN ByteArray must be

> > compared byte-for-byte.

Reviewer 7: Good! 

Also, `Object.is` doesn't work on containers because container equality is based on recursive equality of the contents.

Author: Added.

# JSON Invariants

OCapN holds invariant that:

- Any JSON text that a JavaScript peer can produce using
  `JSON.stringify`,
- excluding those in which the Unicode representation of any object member name
  or string includes a surrogate,
- can then be read back with `JSON.parse`,
- sent to any other OCapN peer,
- returned from any OCapN peer,

> - then saved back to an identical JSON text with `JSON.stringify`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- then saved back to an equivalent JSON text with `JSON.stringify`.
```

Even though `JSON.stringify` is much more deterministic than the JSON standard demands, it is not canonical. It much encode the field of the same struct in a different order.
